We work hard to make Genestack Platform the most intuitive and
user-friendly bioinformatics software. That being said, bioinformatics
is always going to be challenging at times and anyone doing any type of
NGS data analysis has hundreds of questions running through their head.

In this guide we will answer any questions you might have, help you
troubleshoot problems and eventually teach you how to make the most out
of our platform.

We wrote this guide for everyone: whether it’s your first or hundredth
time doing bioinformatics you will find something useful here. We will
cover general aspects of bioinformatics and talk about the specifics of
our platform. We recognize that some of you may be bioinformatics
experts and hence won’t need to read about the basics of bioinformatics.
This is why we have colour-coded this guide: general aspects
of bioinformatics are labeled green.

Before we begin, we’d like to remind you that the community edition of
Genestack Platform is meant to be used by academic and non-commercial
users. The Enterprise edition is designed for our commercial users who
will benefit from features such as a broad range of customization
options, tech support or running the platform on or off the cloud, to
name a few things. If you have any further questions, please get in
touch with our team at contact@genestack.com

Introduction to Bioinformatics
==============================

Bioinformatics can be defined as the application of computational
techniques to make sense of and organize large-scale biological
information.

With costs of sequencing dropping below $1000 per genome, enormous
amounts of sequencing data are being produced each day. Soon enough, it
won’t just be trained bioinformaticians who will need to analyse -omics
data daily. Doctors, lab technicians, researchers, PhD students,
postdocs: anyone working with personalised medicine, genetics-related
research, drug design or biotechnology will have to be able to perform
at least basic -omics analysis types.

Luckily, during the last five years, a range of bioinformatics platforms
emerged on the market promising to bridge the gap between bioinformatics
and non-bioinformaticians. Genestack is one of these platforms and our
community edition is freely available online for academic and
non-commercial users. Our motto, “Do Bioinformatics Faster”, is visible
in all we do: the platform helps the user  shorten the path from idea to
results by automating routine tasks. The system also suggests which
applications can be used to analyse the data at each step and our
interactive visual apps make interpreting the results easy.  

Though you don’t need to know how to code to use the platform, a basic
level of understanding of the sequencing data analysis process and the
tools involved is crucial for correct data analysis and results
interpretation.

In this guide, we will talk about the basic concepts of sequencing
analysis, the steps involved and how to interpret your data. Look out
for the green paragraphs in this guide - they will introduce you to the
basic concepts of NGS data analysis.

If you want more information on the concepts and history of
bioinformatics, we’d like to refer you to this awesome article_ by N.M.
Luscombe, D. Greenbaum and M. Gerstein (2001)



.. _article: https://www.google.com/url?q=https://www.ebi.ac.uk/luscombe/docs/imia_review.pdf&sa=D&ust=1480960531653000&usg=AFQjCNFUGLBg9Y8pGX_C7QUt__SuRovLEw
