Introduction to Bioinformatics
==============================

Bioinformatics can be defined as the application of computational
techniques to make sense of and organize large-scale biological
information.

With costs of sequencing dropping below $1000 per genome, enormous
amounts of sequencing data are being produced each day. Soon enough, it
won’t just be trained bioinformaticians who will need to analyse -omics
data daily. Doctors, lab technicians, researchers, PhD students,
postdocs: anyone working with personalised medicine, genetics-related
research, drug design or biotechnology will have to be able to perform
at least basic -omics analysis types.

Luckily, during the last five years, a range of bioinformatics platforms
emerged on the market promising to bridge the gap between bioinformatics
and non-bioinformaticians. Genestack is one of these platforms and our
community edition is freely available online for academic and
non-commercial users. Our motto, "Do Bioinformatics Faster", is visible
in all we do: the platform helps the user  shorten the path from idea to
results by automating routine tasks. The system also suggests which
applications can be used to analyse the data at each step and our
interactive visual apps make interpreting the results easy.  

Though you don’t need to know how to code to use the platform, a basic
level of understanding of the sequencing data analysis process and the
tools involved is crucial for correct data analysis and results
interpretation.

In this guide, we will talk about the basic concepts of sequencing
analysis, the steps involved and how to interpret your data. Look out
for the green paragraphs in this guide - they will introduce you to the
basic concepts of NGS data analysis.

If you want more information on the concepts and history of
bioinformatics, we’d like to refer you to this awesome article_ by N.M.
Luscombe, D. Greenbaum and M. Gerstein (2001)

.. _article: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/luscombe/docs/imia_review.pdf
